# Intro to SQL

Sometimes you need to interact directly with the database rather than through a query builder or ORM. For example:

* Viewing ad hoc data
* Debugging a database without also running a web server
* Tuning a query to be more efficient than one generated by a query builder or ORM
* Working with embedded databases in hardware devices
* Verifying that data exists or was correctly added
* Examining the schema of a database

SQL is the language to use in these situations.

## SQL

Structured Query Language, or SQL, is a language for issuing commands to databases. For example, to display the `first_name` and `last_name` of every `person` record in the database, you could write this query:

```sql
SELECT first_name, last_name
FROM person;
```

Despite the implications of the word "query", SQL queries do more than read data. You can also add data:

```sql
INSERT INTO person (first_name, last_name)
VALUES ('Art', 'Blakey');
```

update data:

```sql
UPDATE person
SET first_name = "Cannonball"
WHERE last_name = "Adderly";
```

and delete data:

```sql
DELETE FROM person
WHERE id = 13;
LIMIT 1;
```

Additionally, there are SQL queries that control the structure of databases:

```sql
CREATE DATABASE jazz;
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE person (
  id INT PRIMARY KEY,
  first_name VARCHAR(255),
  last_name VARCHAR(255)
);
```

```sql
ALTER TABLE person 
ADD COLUMN birthday DATE;
```

There are many different relational database platforms, such as PostgreSQL, MySQL, Oracle, SQL Server, MariaDB, and many more. While there are some syntax and feature differences between them, they all support many of the exact same queries. This is because the syntax for SQL is standardized by the standards body ANSI.

SQL is a relatively small language at approximately 30 keywords, but it can do everything needed to administer a database.

## Additional Resources

| Resource | Description |
| --- | --- |
| [W3Schools: Introduction to SQL](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_intro.asp) | W3Schools' intro to SQL |
| [W3Schools: Syntax](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_syntax.asp) | W3Schools' syntax reference |
