# Design: Colors

## Why?

Colors have a major impact on the tone and branding of your site, and they help people locate things that are related or important.

## Example

Here's a black and white page:

(image)

How long did it take you to locate this? Is it clear to you that some of the things are related?

Here's the same page with color:

(image)

## What's Going On

On screens, every color you see is generated by incredibly tiny red, green, and blue LEDs. This is one pixel of a screen:

(image)

By varying the intensity of each LED, you can create the appearance of many different colors. These colors have things that are often culturally associated with them:

* Blue: Calm
* Red: Exciting
* Yellow: Impulse
* Purple: Regal
* Green: Money

It may be useful to think of colors as having 3 characteristics:

* Hue
* Saturation
* Light

As a starting guideline, most sites are well-served by having 9 shades of a given color:

* The middle one should be suitable for a button background
* The darkest one should be readable as text
* The lightest one should be suitable for the background of tool tip
* The ones in between should transition consistently and gradually

### Grey is the most important color

The easiest way to give your pages more dimension is to use greys. Consider this:

(image)

Since it's all black on white, it's hard to tell what's important and what isn't. As soon as we add grays:

(image)

The entire thing comes alive.

## Contrast matters

These buttons are hard to read

(image)

Using contrast helps:

(image)

## Gotchas

* Any time you have long-form text, consider using black or a very dark grey on a white or off-white background first.
* Until you're comfortable working with color, your work will probably look better using different shades of the same color. You can still use colors like green, red, and yellow for success/failure/warning indicators, but stick with a single hue for the bulk of your site.
* Go easy on the reversed color schemes.
* Remember that not everything can be equally important- for colors to "pop", they have to have something to pop in contrast to. That means _most_ of your content needs to relatively dull by comparison.
* Really dark and light colors tend to need more saturation to look the same as colors with moderate lightness
* When trying to gradually transition between colors, you may find that rotating the hue a couple of degrees in either direction may help something look a particular way
* Contrast is important

## History

?
