# Intro to Resumes

A resume is the document you will be asked for the most in your job search process. A resume is a product advertisement, except the product is you. It's an opportunity to highlight which parts of your background make you especially well-suited for a particular position. A resume is not a list of everything you've ever done (that's a Curriciulum Vitae), it's not a legal document like a contract, and it's not a place to be humble or indirect.

## Resume Sections

Here are the most common sections people use in technical resumes:

### Contact Information

Include:

* **Name**
* **A title to describe yourself**. Ideally, this is the same as the title of the job you're applying for. Examples include "Software Engineer", "Software Developer", "Technologist", "Application Engineer", and "Fullstack Developer."
* **City and state/municipality**. This does not necessarily need to be the city you currently live in, but it should be a city you're willing to live in if you get the job. It's usually not necessary to be any more specific than the city.
* **Email address**. Your professional email address should be very straight-forward, and ideally be from a custom domain.
* **Personal website**. Optional. Ideally hosted at a custom domain.
* **Phone number**. Optional.

### Work experience

You are not obligated to include every job you've ever had. Focus on:

* **Recent jobs**
* **Jobs where you were especially successfu or celebrated**
* **Jobs that have skills relevant to where you're applying.** Note that these don't need to be technical skills! You may have worked in a similar industry as the company you're applying to or otherwise have experience that translates well.

For each job, include:

* **Name of the company**
* **Name of the position.** Note that this doesn't need to precisely match the title you had at the company, it just needs to accurately reflect the work you did. For example, if your official title was "Associate Web Engineer II", it's OK to list the job on your resume as "Web Engineer," "Software Engineer," or any other title that matches the work you did. This is especially true of companies that use unconventional titles. If you served in different roles at the company, you can include them as separate entries if they were very different jobs or just include the most recent one if they were similar.
* **Start and end years**. If you were there less than a year, also include the month. If you're still employed there, write the date as "Present". Date ranges are separated by an "em-dash" (like a hyphen, but longer) with no spaces on either side. For example, "November 2019—June 2020" or "2018—Present".
* **Description of your work and accomplishments**. Use past tense if it's a former job, present tense if it's a current job. Use sentence fragments that don't have subjects. For example, instead of writing "I generated $1 million in revenue," write "Generated $1 million in revenue." Doing so drops the repetition of using "I" in every sentence, and allows you to start the fragment with a strong action verb.

Focus on the benefits you provided to the company more than the tasks you performed. "Waited tables" is a task, "Served over 5000 customers" also includes the impact you had on the company. Whenever possible, quantify your work. Include how much time was saved by a process you designed, how much revenue was generated by a project you worked on, or how many customers used your product. Companies hire people to save them time, make them money, or help them pursue a mission. Frame all of your work in terms of how you've successfully done this in the past. Remember, it's not your biography, it's a sales pitch.

### Skills

List your revelant technical skills. Ideally, these match some of the key skills outlined in the job description you're applying for. Three things to leave off:

* Don't include a laundry list of every technology you've ever used; stick with your most relevant, impressive, and strongest skills.
* Don't include skills that are common to any professional. These include things like the Microsoft Office suite, browsers, critical thinking skills, punctuality, teamwork, or communication skills. These things should be inferred by how you handle the application process.
* Don't include skills that are implied by other skills. If you list React, you don't need to also list HTML and CSS. If you list Express, you don't also need to list Node.

Skills should be listed from most to least relevant to the position.

Be extremely careful in how you list a technology. Many common technologies are spelled counterintuitively and inconsistently. A few for reference:

* React (not React.js, ReactJS, or REACT)
* Express (not Express.js)
* Node.js (not Node, NodeJS, or NODE)
* Ruby on Rails (not Rails)
* Sass (not SASS)
* Jest (not Jest.js)
* Cypress (not Cypress.io or Cypress.js)
* AWS (not Aws or Amazon Web Services)
* Unix (not UNIX)

Always check the official website or documentation to verify spelling and punctuation.

### Education

List any formal education, including university programs and code schools. In most cases, these should be listed in reverse-chronological order. For each, include:

* **The name of the institution**.
* **The name of the credential you earned**. Be very careful about how you format credentials. While we colloquilliary say "bachelor's degree" and "master's degree," the correct titles are singular and include the discline (e.g. "Master of Arts, English Literature", "Bachelor of Science, Chemistry"). You can also abbreviate the credentials (e.g. "M.A., English Literature", "B.S., Chemistry").
* **The year you earned or will earn the credential**.
* **A list of key subjects studied, memberships, and accomplishments.**

### Accomplishments

Awards, volunteer work, or unique credentials. This section serves a couple purposes:

* Showcasing impressive parts of your background that don't fit into any of the other sections
* Signaling attractive values or attributes that are hard to quantify otherwise, such as dedication and generosity
* Giving the reader something unique to remember you by. When you're reviewing dozens or hundreds of resumes, anything that helps you stand out is good. "That one guy with the pretty good project" isn't as good as "that one guy with the pretty good project who ran 10 marathons in 30 days."

Accomplishments sections should have at least 5 entries, each one should be a single sentence. When relevant, include the year.

### Portfolio

A list of 2-4 projects you've done that highlight skills you have that are relevant to the job. It's unlikely that someone reading your resume will look at all of your projects, and it's likely they'll only look at one. By limiting your portfolio to your absolute best work, you increase the likelihood that employers will see it. Prioritize:

* **Complete projects.** Don't include a project that's in any kind of broken or half-finished state. Delete work-in-progress features if necessary. Make sure that each project has a complete README.md, a strong commit history, and no sloppy or broken code.
* **Technologies the company uses**. Optional, but ideal.
* **A range of technologies or problems**. If what you're pitching to the company is your range and adaptability, your portfolio should show If what you're pitching to the company is your depth of knowledge in one technology, your portfolio should show a wide range of problems you've solved with it.

For each project in your portfolio, include:

* Name of the project
* **A deployed URL where it can used**. This should be a custom URL, and clicking the URL should go to the site.
* **Technology highlights.** "React, SCSS." is more impressive than "React, HTML, CSS, JavaScript, SCSS, Node, Bash, Git."
* **Repo where the code can be found**. If it's on GitHub, `username/repo-name` is sufficient text. Additionally include a link to the repo for the digital version.
* **A 1-2 sentence description of what the app does**. Focus on the problem it solves more than how you solved it. For example, "Matches foster dogs with homes using the PetFinder API" is better than "A React app that use the PetFinder API for dog matching."

## Section Ordering

To be effective as an advertisement for yourself, you should prioritize sections by how impressive they are likely to be to the person reading your resume. Here are some scenarios:

If you have some relevant technology experience already and some formal education:

1. Contact
1. Work Experience
1. Education
1. Accomplishments
1. Skills

If you have no technology experience and no formal education and few accomplishments:

1. Contact
1. Portfolio
1. Work Experience
1. Skills
1. Accomplishments

Some principles:

* Always lead with your contact information
* Work experience is usually the most valuable because it represents you delivering value to an organization
* A portfolio is usually used in place of technical work experience if none exists
* Skills are usually the lowest priority, because they're less concrete than education or accomplishments. If you can include skills in the descriptions of jobs or portfolio items, this section can be omitted.

## Applicant Tracking Systems

Applicant Tracking Systems, or ATSs, are automated tools that scan resumes from incoming applications and help recruiters manage the flow. You may come across a lot of advice about optimizing your resume for ATSs, often people or companies selling resume services. This is rarely necessary. ATS keyword matching is notoriously unreliable, and most recruiters know it. Recruiters are afraid of missing applications from great candidates because they were filtered by the ATS, so there's a good chance a human will scan your resume.

## Resumes are Scanned, Not Read

When you read a book you typically read each word sequentially. Resumes are rarely read this closely. Instead, people reading resumes scan through the page looking for words and phrases that jump out to them. It's one of the reasons your position descriptions should use sentence fragments instead of full sentences.

## Digital vs. Print

When applying directly to companies, always send your resume as a PDF. When applying to a recruiting agency, always send it as a text document (they generally remove your name when sending it to clients). In both cases, companies still print out resumes fairly often (they're useful to take physical notes on during interviews), so check that your resume doesn't have blue text and underlines for links and that all the information in your resume prints well.
