# Git: Commits 2

You know how to make a commit. How do you see what commits you've already made, and how do you refer to those commits in Git commands?

## Viewing Commits

To see all of the commits in your project, run `git log`. This will open a program that will take over your terminal. You can scroll down with `j` and up with `k`. To exit and return back to your terminal, press `q`

Note that you can condense the output of `git log` with the `git log --oneline` option. Additionally, you can print the commits directly to your terminal without opening the `git log` program with `git log --oneline | cat`. Lastly, you can limit the number of commits being display by passing a number as a flag, like `git log --oneline -3 | cat`.

## SHA1 Hashes

A commit is represented by a SHA1 hash. It's not important to understand what the means to use them effectively. Think of them as unique IDs. They're automatically generated by Git, are each 40 characters long, and look like this:

```
86f7e437faa5a7fce15d1ddcb9eaeaea377667b8
da23614e02469a0d7c7bd1bdab5c9c474b1904dc
a9993e364706816aba3e25717850c26c9cd0d89d
```

Unless more characters are needed to differentiate between them, SHA1 hashes are usually referred to be their first 5 characters:

```
86f7e
da236
a9993
```

SHA1 hashes are used to refer to commits in many different git commands:

```bash
git checkout 86f7e
git revert da236
git reset a9993
```

## Relative References

Rather than referring to a commit by its SHA-1 hash, you can also refer to it relative to your current location:

* `HEAD~` means "The previous commit"
* `HEAD~1` means "2 commits ago"
* `HEAD~2` means "3 commits ago"
* `HEAD~~` means "2 commits ago"
* `HEAD~~~` means "3 commits ago"

## Watch Out!

* There's no mnemonic way to remember `j` goes up and `k` does down inside `git log`. They're used because they fall under the index and middle finger of your left hand when your hands are on the keyboard's home row. `git log` isn't the only command that uses `j` and `k` this way, so it's worth practicing.

